**SIMLR** *(Single-cell Interpretation via Multi-kernel LeaRning)*
===============================


##OVERVIEW

Single-cell RNA-seq technologies enable high throughput gene expression measurement of individual cells, and allow the discovery of heterogeneity within cell populations.  Measurement of cell-to-cell gene expression similarity is critical to identification, visualization and analysis of cell populations. However, single-cell data introduce challenges to conventional measures of gene expression similarity because of the high level of noise, outliers and dropouts. We develop a novel similarity-learning framework, *SIMLR* (Single-cell Interpretation via Multi-kernel LeaRning), which learns an appropriate distance metric from the data for dimension reduction, clustering and visualization. *SIMLR* is capable of separating known subpopulations more accurately in single-cell data sets than do existing dimension reduction methods. Additionally, *SIMLR* demonstrates high sensitivity and accuracy on high-throughput peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) data sets generated by the GemCode single-cell technology from 10x Genomics. 

##SIMLR

*SIMLR* offers three main unique advantages over previous methods: (1) it learns a distance metric that best fits the structure of the data via combining multiple kernels. This is important because the diverse statistical characteristics due to large noise and dropout effect of single-cell data produced today do not easily fit specific statistical assumptions made by standard dimension reduction algorithms. The adoption of multiple kernel representations provides a better fit to the true underlying statistical distribution of the specific input scRNA-seq data set; (2) *SIMLR* addresses the challenge of high levels of dropout events that can significantly weaken cell-to-cell similarities even under an appropriate distance metric, by employing graph diffusion, which improves weak similarity measures that are likely to result from noise or dropout events; (3) in contrast to some previous analyses that pre-select gene subsets of known function, *SIMLR* is unsupervised, thus allowing de novo discovery from the data. We empirically demonstrate that *SIMLR* produces more reliable clusters than commonly used linear methods, such as principal component analysis (PCA), and nonlinear methods, such as t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE), and we use *SIMLR* to provide 2-D and 3-D visualizations that assist with the interpretation of single-cell data derived from several diverse technologies and biological samples. 

##REFERENCE

The latest draft of the manuscript related to *SIMLR* can be found as a preprint at http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/06/09/052225. 

##DOWNLOAD

We provide both the R and MATLAB implementations of *SIMLR* in the SIMLR branch, while the master (stable version) or the development (development version) branches provide the version of *SIMLR* available on Bioconductor. 

##RUNNING SIMLR R IMPLEMENTATION

SIMLR is now provided as an R package. To install, simply type the following within R (requires devtools):

```{r}
devtools::install_github('BatzoglouLabSU/SIMLR')
```

##Example datasets. 

The 4 example datasets are provided in the directory data. 

Specifically, the dataset of Test_1_mECS.RData refers to http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25599176, Test_2_Kolod.RData refers to http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4595712/, Test_3_Pollen.RData refers to http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25086649 and Test_4_Usoskin.RData refers to http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25420068. 

##RUNNING SIMLR MATLAB IMPLEMENTATION

We also provide the MATLAB code to run *SIMLR* on 4 examples in the script main_demo.m. 

We make use of external C programs during the computations of *SIMLR*. The code is located in the MATLAB directory in the files *Kbeta.cpp* and *projsplx_c.c*. In order to compite the program, one needs to run on the MATLAB console the commands *mex Kbeta.cpp* and *mex projsplx_R.c*. 

OS X pre-compiled files are also provided. 
